Nikita Yadav

A Geographical Case Study of Seattle

There is a lot more to the discipline of Geography than just maps. A person who studies
Geography aims to understand and represent human - space relations and the subject of study can
vary in terms of geographical scale, as well as the lens through which the subject is dissected and
studied. In this class, we were tasked with observing human life in Seattle and developing a
context for the city as a place that influences and is influenced by the people living in it. Through
the ten weeks of the quarter, we worked through a set of projects, each of which investigated a
different theme in relation to the city.
Seattle’s reputation for gray skies, closed-off people, and ‘the long dark’ precedes it and
as an out of state student that moved here five years ago, I feared that my experiences in college
would be limited by the classic stereotypes. Time has changed my perception of the city and
personal experiences have opened me up to other sides of Seattle that don’t necessarily fall in
line with what I originally expected. My perspective is certainly shaped by the environment I’m
in and being a college student living in a college town means that my understanding of Seattle
isn’t completely objective and could be controlled for certain variables in order to make the
projects a bit more scientific and relevant to a larger demographic. The observations I made
during the course of this class represent Seattle through my eyes.
Seattle is home to the largest state ferry system and living in the city, one can see the
ways the various bodies of water affect human life. Solid bridge infrastructure is essential and
certain places are inaccessible, or significantly more difficult to get to, without a ferry. How
people move through a place is an important aspect to explore and of the various types of
transportation in Seattle the ferries are the most unique! Serving several different islands, the
ferry system is a part of many peoples commutes, and for those that must cross water to get to
work, a reliable time schedule and consistently staffed ferries are a priority. Unfortunately, the
ferry system has been in trouble for a while now and the pandemic exacerbated the issues. A lack
of funding and worsening shortages in staff and vessels have left residents feeling that the system
is “broken”, without much hope for sufficient financial relief from the state.
The city is divided into several, distinct neighborhoods, each one has a different feel from
the next. There are the older, more historic areas, such as Pioneer Square and Georgetown, and
then other areas such as South Lake Union and Downtown that are equally as old, but developing
quickly due to the influx of large tech companies. For the project on neighborhood
characteristics, my partner and I explored Georgetown. A neighborhood with a lot of preserved
character, Georgetown was fun to walk through and offered a lot of novel attractions. Its
reputation for being a transportation hub was well represented in the art around town and the
regular low flying planes passing overhead. The neighborhood seemed to draw a younger crowd
into the coffee shops and breweries and its residential streets contained homes in various states of
disrepair, with quite a few well-maintained and historic looking.

The third aspect of Seattle we explored was the colors of the city. We wanted to answer
the question “what color is Seattle?” My group chose to investigate the UW student population
and through a series of pictures we examined their outerwear and backpack color choices. We
developed the hypothesis that we’d see a lot of blacks and grays, especially once we looked
around at each other and saw that we were all wearing black. The infographic we ended up with
almost aligned with that theory, but we suspect that the near monochrome coloring was due to
camera quality issues.
For the final project, we aimed to look at where people consider their “happy places” to
be. The database we worked with contained data points created by fellow classmates and the
stories within them made it apparent that they were written by students. I looked through the
locations with the intention of distinguishing indoor places from outdoor places. My theory was
that there would be a higher number of outdoor locations, considering that we are all students
and spend a lot of time indoors as well as the typical Seattleite affinity for the outdoors.
Surprisingly, outdoor happy places only beat indoor happy places by a little, and many students
claimed libraries and cafes as happy locations because they found them to be pleasant places to
study.
Managing my time and working through a project from beginning to end with a good
amount of creative freedom was a bit of a challenge at first. Picking a topic and deciding how to
collect the data for it posed the first challenge. Once I had a project or two under my belt I began
to have more fun with it though. The planning stage was the most important and that became
clearer the further along I got in the class. It became apparent that a thoroughly thought out work
plan made the rest of the process smoother and allowed us to get things done in a timely manner.
Working with data was sometimes difficult when it wasn’t too clear where we could acquire
specific datasets, but once we found them, cleaning basic text or number data was fairly simple.
Working with image data was new and took some time to get used to though. Making the
infographics was the most fun and the instructional walkthroughs made it easy to learn how to
make all the different kinds of charts. The part of the projects I had the most trouble with was the
story telling. I had some trouble coming up with an interesting narrative surrounding a few of the
charts, because a lot of them were self-explanatory and presented the phenomena upfront. I do
understand the importance of context with data though and writing the stories helped reinforce
that idea.
Going forward, I think an interesting project to take on could be an investigation into
Seattle driving habits, specifically car accidents and traffic incidents. As with any major city,
Seattle tends to have a ton of traffic, but it seems to me that car accidents are notably frequent
and drivers can sometimes be rather aggressive or completely timid and they just overall practice
some pretty unsafe driving. I would like to see if the numbers line up with my theory.

This class gave me the opportunity to explore new ways of thinking and visualizing real
data. I got to practice technical skills like coding in Python and making maps with QGIS, while
also exercising my critical thinking, problem-solving, teamwork, and time management skills. I
developed a better understanding of the city of Seattle, as well as how I live in it, and it has
opened my eyes to the variety of methods one can use to both understand human spatial
relationships and share those discoveries with others.

Works Cited
"Brief History of Seattle." Seattle Municipal Archives,
https://www.seattle.gov/cityarchives/seattle-facts/brief-history-of-seattle.
Grambush, Jacklyn. "11 Stereotypes Seattleites Won't Even Try to Deny." Culture Trip,
https://theculturetrip.com/north-america/usa/washington/articles/11-stereotypes-seattleite
s-wont-even-try-to-deny.
Matson, Andrews. "How Seattle Became the Future of Men's Fashion." Esquire,
https://www.esquire.com/style/mens-fashion/a41319302/seattle-fashion-history/.
McNichols, Joshua. "Bainbridge Island residents show new optimism to revive Washington
ferries." KUOW,

https://www.kuow.org/stories/bainbridge-island-residents-show-new-optimism-to-revive-
washington-ferries.

"WA’s ferry system is broken, and Gov. Inslee must right the ship." The Seattle Times,
https://www.seattletimes.com/opinion/editorials/was-ferry-system-is-broken-and-gov-insl
ee-must-right-the-ship/.
Wilma, David. "Ferry Service Begins on Puget Sound on July 1, 1951." HistoryLink.org,
https://www.historylink.org/File/2975.
